.Dd April 13, 2024
.Dt portstreelint 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portstreelint
.Nd FreeBSD ports tree lint
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl \-nocfg
.Op Fl \-gencfg|\-g Ar FILE
.Op Fl \-show\-cat|\-C
.Op Fl \-show\-mnt|\-M
.Op Fl \-cat|\-c Ar LIST
.Op Fl \-mnt|\-m Ar LIST
.Op Fl \-port|\-p Ar LIST
.Op Fl \-tree|\-t Ar DIR
.Op Fl \-plist Ar NUM
.Op Fl \-broken Ar NUM
.Op Fl \-deprecated Ar NUM
.Op Fl \-forbidden Ar NUM
.Op Fl \-unchanged Ar NUM
.Op Fl \-check\-host|\-h
.Op Fl \-check\-url|\-u
.Op Fl \-output|\-o Ar FILE
.Op Fl \-debug
.Op Fl \-info
.Op Fl \-version
.Op Fl \-help|\-?
.Op Fl \-
.Pp
The aliases
.Em ptlint
and
.Em ptl
are also available to shorten the command name.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility checks the FreeBSD ports tree Index
and some parts of the ports' Makefiles for errors and warnings.
.Pp
By default it will scan the whole port tree, but you can select
a subset of the ports with the options
.Op Fl \-cat|\-c
for categories,
.Op Fl \-mnt|\-m
for maintainers and
.Op Fl \-port|\-p
for ports.
All these options expect a parameter which can be a single item
or a comma\-separated list of items.
If you combine several of these operators they will perform as
a logical AND.
.Pp
The
.Op Fl \-mnt|\-m
option defaults to @FreeBSD.org for unspecified domains.
.Pp
In order to know which categories or maintainers are available
for selection, you can use the
.Op Fl \-show\-cat|\-C
and
.Op Fl \-show\-mnt|\-M
options to view all the categories and maintainers with their
number of associated ports.
.Pp
The two costlier analysis are disabled by default.
You can check if the port's www sites hostnames are resolvable
with the
.Op Fl \-check\-host|\-h
option (takes about 15 minutes on the
whole port tree).
And you can check if the port's www sites URL are available
with the
.Op Fl \-check\-url|\-u
option, which implies the previous one
(takes about 6 hours on the whole port tree).
.Pp
The checks list includes:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Nonexistent Makefile
.It
Nonexistent INDEX:port\-path
.It
Unusual INDEX:installation\-prefix (warning)
.It
Too long INDEX:comments (> 70 characters) (warning)
.It
Uncapitalized INDEX:comments
.It
INDEX:comments ending with a dot
.It
INDEX:comments different from Makefile:COMMENT
.It
Nonexistent INDEX:description\-file
.It
URL ending INDEX:description\-file
.It
INDEX:description\-file content same as INDEX:comment
.It
INDEX:description\-file content no longer than INDEX:comment
.It
Nonexistent pkg\-plist, Makefile:PLIST_FILES/PLIST/PLIST_SUB (debug)
.It
Makefile:PLIST_FILES abuse (warning)
.It
INDEX:maintainer different from Makefile:MAINTAINER
.It
Unofficial categories (warning)
.It
INDEX:categories different from Makefile:CATEGORIES
.It
Empty INDEX:www\-site
.It
Unresolvable INDEX:www\-site (optional)
.It
Unaccessible INDEX:www\-site (optional)
.It
INDEX:www\-site different from Makefile:WWW
.It
Ports marked as BROKEN, DEPRECATED, FORBIDDEN, IGNORE, RESTRICTED (info)
.It
Ports marked with an EXPIRATION_DATE (warning)
.It
Ports marked as BROKEN, FORBIDDEN or DEPRECATED for too long (warning)
.It
Ports unchanged for a long time (info)
.It
Makefile:PORTVERSION and Makefile:DISTVERSION used simultaneously
.It
VuXML vulnerabilities for the current port versions (warning)
.It
Missing Makefile:LICENSE
.It
Unofficial licenses (warning)
.It
Unnecessary Makefile:LICENSE_COMB=single (warning)
.It
Unnecessary Makefile:LICENSE_COMB=multi (warning)
.El
.Pp
It's possible to change the default values for PLIST_FILES abuse,
BROKEN_since, DEPRECATED_since, FORBIDDEN_since and Unchanged_since
with the
.Op Fl \-plist ,
.Op Fl \-broken ,
.Op Fl \-deprecated ,
.Op Fl \-forbidden
and
.Op Fl \-unchanged
options, followed by a number of files for the first
one and a number of days for the others.
And you can select a port tree in a location other than
.Pa /usr/ports
with the
.Op Fl \-tree|\-t
option.
.Pp
Finally, there's a
.Op Fl \-output|\-o
option to generate a CSV delimited file with the per\-maintainer
findings to a specified filename. This allows for automated processing
of the results, such as, for example, sending warning emails, storing
results and displaying only diffs since previous run...
.Pp
For convenience, you can put your favourite options in a
configuration file, which will be read before processing the
environment and the command line, unless you use the
.Op Fl \-nocfg
option. You can generate a default configuration file with the
.Op Fl \-gencfg|\-g
option followed by a filename. This file also offers full control
over the checks to perform, and a way to discard false\-positive
vulnerabilities and unwanted licenses report messages.
.Ss OPTIONS
.Op Fl \-nocfg
Don't use the configuration file
.Pp
.Op Fl \-gencfg|\-g Ar FILE
Generate a default configuration file in FILE
.Pp
.Op Fl \-show\-cat|\-C
Show categories with ports count
.Pp
.Op Fl \-show\-mnt|\-M
Show maintainers with ports count
.Pp
.Op Fl \-cat|\-c Ar LIST
Select only the comma\-separated categories in LIST
.Pp
.Op Fl \-mnt|\-m Ar LIST
Select only the comma\-separated maintainers in LIST
.Pp
.Op Fl \-port|\-p Ar LIST
Select only the comma\-separated ports in LIST
.Pp
.Op Fl \-tree|\-t Ar DIR
Ports directory (default=/usr/ports)
.Pp
.Op Fl \-plist Ar NUM
Set PLIST_FILES abuse to NUM files
.Pp
.Op Fl \-broken Ar NUM
Set BROKEN since to NUM days
.Pp
.Op Fl \-deprecated Ar NUM
Set DEPRECATED since to NUM days
.Pp
.Op Fl \-forbidden Ar NUM
Set FORBIDDEN since to NUM days
.Pp
.Op Fl \-unchanged Ar NUM
Set Unchanged since to NUM days
.Pp
.Op Fl \-check\-host|\-h
Enable checking hostname resolution (long!)
.Pp
.Op Fl \-check\-url|\-u
Enable checking URL (very long!)
.Pp
.Op Fl \-output|\-o
Enable per\-maintainer CSV output to FILE
.Pp
.Op Fl \-debug
Enable logging at debug level
.Pp
.Op Fl \-info
Enable logging at info level
.Pp
.Op Fl \-version
Print version and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl \-help|\-?
Print usage and this help message and exit
.Pp
.Op Fl \-
Options processing terminator
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The
.Ev PTLINT_DEBUG
environment variable can be set to any value to enable debug mode.
.Pp
If the system's
.Ev PORTSDIR
environment variable is set, it'll be used instead of the
default
.Pa /usr/ports .
But the
.Op Fl \-tree|\-t Ar DIR
option will still override it.
.Sh FILES
The whole port tree under
.Pa /usr/ports ,
or the location indicated by the
.Ev PORTSDIR
environment variable, or the
.Op Fl \-tree|\-t
argument:
.Bl -bullet
.It
as root, if you have installed portsnap, update to the last version with "portsnap fetch update"
.It
or, if you have installed git, clone the latest repository with "git clone https://git.FreeBSD.org/ports.git /usr/ports"
.El
.Pp
.Pa /usr/ports/INDEX\-xx
: where xx is the major version of FreeBSD that you are using
(as I write this xx=14).
.Bl -bullet
.It
as root, get the last version with "cd /usr/ports ; make fetchindex"
.It
or rebuild it from your port tree with "cd /usr/ports ; make index"
.El
.Pp
.Pa ${HOME}/.ptlint
: an INI\-style configuration file.
.Bl -bullet
.It
Generate a default one with the
.Op Fl \-gencfg|\-g
option and tweak it to your taste.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std portstreelint
.Sh EXAMPLES
To analyze the full port tree (takes a long time!), do:
.Bd -literal
$ nohup portstreelint \-\-info \-hu > stdout.txt 2> stderr.txt &
.Ed
.Pp
To analyze the full port tree in the background and generate a CSV
file, do:
.Bd -literal
$ nohup portstreelint \-huo csv_results.txt > /dev/null 2>&1 &
.Ed
.Pp
To analyze the ports of a specific maintainer identified by id@domain,
do:
.Bd -literal
$ portstreelint \-\-info \-m id@domain
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ports 7 ,
.Xr lint 1 ,
.Xr portlint 1 ,
.Xr vuxml 3
.Pp
.Lk https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/porters\-handbook/ FreeBSD Porter's Handbook
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is not a standard UNIX command.
.Pp
This implementation tries to follow the PEP 8 style guide for Python
code.
.Sh PORTABILITY
None. Works only on FreeBSD, but who needs anything else?
.Pp
Packaged for
.Fx
as
.Em pyXX\\-pnu\\-portstreelint .
.Sh HISTORY
While working on the 4th version of the pysec2vuxml tool,
I noticed there were errors in the FreeBSD port Index,
so I built the
.Em portlint2
tool to analyze this more thoroughly...
.Pp
After discussions on the freebsd\-ports mailing list
an interest in checking port vulnerabilities arose,
which led me to convert that standalone command
into a Python package in order to benefit from my
.Em vuxml
library.
.Sh LICENSE
It is available under the 3\-clause BSD license.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hubert Tournier
.Lk https://github.com/HubTou
.Sh CAVEATS
The IGNORE mark check is not reliable because this tool doesn't parse
the ports' Makefiles, but just loads their variables without regard to
the conditional tests that may surround them.
.Pp
The nonexistent plist check is not very helpful because there are still
undocumented cases where the list is auto generated.
.Pp
The ports using exotic versioning schemes will be skipped from the
vulnerability check because the library we use for version comparisons
is geared toward Python ports and limited for this usage.
